refreshes the Fusion quickstart (#8050)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/fusion-qs.md

This quickstart guide will get you from zero to running your first dbt project with <Constant name="fusion" /> + VS Code. By the end, you’ll have:
- A working dbt project (`jaffle_shop`) built with the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />
- The dbt VS Code extension installed and connected  
- The ability to preview, compile, and run dbt commands directly from your IDE 

### About the dbt Fusion engine

<Constant name="fusion" /> and the features it provides are available in multiple environments:

| Environment | How to use <Constant name="fusion" /> |
|--------------|-------------------|
| **<Constant name="cloud_ide" />** | <Constant name="fusion" /> is automatically enabled; just [upgrade your environment(s)](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#dbt-fusion-engine). |
| **dbt CLI (local)** | [Install <Constant name="fusion_engine" />](/docs/fusion/install-fusion) locally following this guide. |
| **VS Code / Cursor IDE** | [Install the dbt extension](/docs/install-dbt-extension) to unlock <Constant name="fusion" />'s interactive power in your editor. |

> Tip: Read more [about the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />](/docs/fusion/about-fusion) to understand what’s new, what’s changed, and what’s deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Tip:** Read more [about the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />](/docs/fusion/about-fusion) to understand what’s new, what’s changed, and what’s deprecated.
```

## Prerequisites

To take full advantage of this guide, you'll need to meet the following prerequisites:

- You should have a basic understanding of [dbt projects](/docs/build/projects), [git workflows](/docs/cloud/git/git-version-control), and [data warehouse requirements](/docs/supported-data-platforms).
- Make sure you're using a supported adapter and authentication method:
    <FusionDWH /> 
- You need a macOS (Terminal), Linux, or Windows (Powershell) machine to run the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />. 
- You need to have [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) installed. The [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/en) code editor will also work, but these instructions will focus on VS Code.

> - You'll need admin or install privileges on your machine.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need admin or install privileges on your machine.  
```

    ```shell
    curl -fsSL https://public.cdn.getdbt.com/fs/install/install.sh | sh -s -- --update
    ```
2. To use `dbtf` immediately after installation, reload your shell so that the new `$PATH` is recognized:
    ```shell
    exec $SHELL
    ```
    Or you can close and reopen your terminal window. This will load the updated environment settings into the new session.
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows (PowerShell)">

1. Run the following command in PowerShell to install the `dbtf` binary:
    ```powershell
    irm https://public.cdn.getdbt.com/fs/install/install.ps1 | iex
    ```
2. To use `dbtf` immediately after installation, reload your shell so that the new `Path` is recognized:
    ```powershell
    Start-Process powershell
    ```
    Or you can close and reopen your terminal window. This will load the updated environment settings into the new session.
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Verify the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> installation

1. After installation, open a new command-line window to confirm that <Constant name="fusion" /> was installed correctly by checking the version. 
    ```bash
    dbtf --version
    ```

> 2. You should see the following output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. You should see output similar to the following:
```
Tweaked this line a bit because the version number might change over time

    ```bash
    dbt-fusion 2.0.0-preview.45
    ```
:::tip
You can run these commands using `dbt`, or use `dbtf` as an unambiguous alias for <Constant name="fusion" />, if you have another dbt CLI installed on your machine.
:::

### Install the dbt VS Code extension

The dbt VS Code extension is available in the [Visual Studio extension marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbtLabsInc.dbt). Download it directly from your VS Code editor:

> 1. Navigate to the **Extensions** tab of VS Code (or Cursor)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the **Extensions** tab of VS Code (or Cursor).
```

2. Search for `dbt` and choose the one from the publisher `dbt Labs Inc`.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-marketplace.png" width="60%" title="Search for the extension"/>
3. Click **Install**.

> 4. When prompted, register or skip (you can register later). You can also check out our [installation instructions](/docs/install-dbt-extension) to come back to it later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. When the prompt appears, you can register the extension now or skip it (you can register later). You can also check out our [installation instructions](/docs/install-dbt-extension) to come back to it later.
```

> 5. Confirm you've installed it by looking for the **dbt Extension** label in the status bar. If you see it, the extension was installed successfully!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Confirm you've installed the extension by looking for the **dbt Extension** label in the status bar. If you see it, the extension was installed successfully!
```

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-lsp-download.png" width="60%" title="Verify installation in the status bar."/>

## Initialize the Jaffle Shop project
Now let's create your first dbt project powered by <Constant name="fusion" />!

> 1. Run the following command from your command line to set up an example project and configure a database connection profile. 

Reviewer: Which command is this line referring to? Is it `dbtf init`? I was a bit confused at first because it seems that there are two options under this step. Maybe we can change this to the following and put the options in bullet points:

```suggestion
1. Set up an example project and configure a database connection profile. 
```

>    If you *do not* already have a connection profile that you want to use, start with this command and prompts will guide you through configuring a profile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If you *do not* already have a connection profile that you want to use, start with this command and prompts will guide you through configuring a profile:
```

    ```bash
    dbtf init
    ```

>     If you do already have a connection profile that you want to use, use the `--skip-profile-setup` flag then edit the generated `dbt_project.yml` to replace `profile: jaffle_shop` with `profile: <YOUR-PROFILE-NAME>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If you already have a connection profile that you want to use, use the `--skip-profile-setup` flag then edit the generated `dbt_project.yml` to replace `profile: jaffle_shop` with `profile: <YOUR-PROFILE-NAME>`.
```

    ```bash
    dbtf init --skip-profile-setup
    ```

>     If you created new credentials through the interactive prompts, `init` will automatically run `dbtf debug` at the end. This will check to ensure the newly created profile establishes a valid connection with the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you created new credentials through the interactive prompts, `init` automatically runs `dbtf debug` at the end. This ensures the newly created profile establishes a valid connection with the database.
```

    ```bash
    cd jaffle_shop
    ```

3. Build your dbt project (which includes creating example data):
    ```bash
    dbtf build
    ```

This will:
- Load example data into your warehouse
- Create, build, and test models
- Verify your dbt environment is fully operational

## Explore with the dbt VS Code extension

The dbt VS Code extension compiles and builds your project with the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />, a powerful and blazing fast rebuild of dbt from the ground up. 

Want to see <Constant name="fusion" /> in action? Check out the following video to get a sense of how it works:

<div style={{ position: 'relative', maxWidth: '960px', margin: '2rem auto', overflow: 'hidden', borderRadius: '12px', height: '500px', boxShadow: 'var(--ifm-global-shadow-lw)' }}>
  <iframe
    src="https://app.storylane.io/share/a1rkqx0mbd7a" 
    title="dbt Fusion + VS Code extension walkthrough"
    style={{ position: 'relative', top: '-48px', height: '900px', width: '100%', border: 0, paddingBottom:'calc(42.20% + 25px)',transform: 'scale(1)'}}
    allow="fullscreen; autoplay; encrypted-media"
  />
</div>

Now that your project works, open it in VS Code and see Fusion in action:

> 1. In VS Code, open the **View** menu and click **Command Palette** then type **Workspaces: Add Folder to Workspace**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In VS Code, open the **View** menu and click **Command Palette**. Enter **Workspaces: Add Folder to Workspace**.
```

> 2. Select your `jaffle_shop` folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select your `jaffle_shop` folder.
```

> 3. If you skip this step, the [dbt language server](https://docs.getdbt.com/blog/dbt-fusion-engine-components#the-dbt-vs-code-extension-and-language-server) (LSP) will not run. The LSP enables features like autocomplete, hover info, and inline error highlights.

Reviewer: Which step is this referring to? Might be helpful to not add this as a separate step because it does not require an action from a user, but it's actually referring to a previous step (is that right?)

4. Open a model file to see the definition for the `orders` model. This is the model we'll use in all of the examples below.
    ```bash
        models/marts/orders.sql
    ```

> 5. Locate **Lineage** and **Query Results** in the lower panel and the **dbt icon** in the upper right corner next to your editor groups. If you see all of these, the extension is installed correctly and running!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Locate **Lineage** and **Query Results** in the lower panel, and the **dbt icon** in the upper right corner next to your editor groups. If you see all of these, the extension is installed correctly and running!
```

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-running.png" width="80%" title="The VS Code UI with the extension running."/>

Now you're ready to see some of these awesome features in action!

<!--no toc -->
- [Preview data and code](#preview-data-and-code)
- [Navigate your project with lineage tools](#navigate-your-project-with-lineage-tools)
- [Use the power of SQL understanding](#use-the-power-of-sql-understanding)
- [Speeding up common dbt commands](#speeding-up-common-dbt-commands)

#### Preview data and code

Gain valuable insights into your data transformation during each step of your development process. 
You can quickly access model results and underlying data structures directly from your code. These previews help validate your code step-by-step. 

1. Locate the **table icon** for **Preview File** in the upper right corner. Click it to preview results in the **Query Results** tab.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/preview-query-results.png" width="80%" title="Preview model query results."/>

> 1. Click **Preview CTE** above `orders as (` to preview results in the **Query Results** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click **Preview CTE** above `orders as (` to preview results in the **Query Results** tab.
```

    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/preview-cte-query-results-3.png" width="80%" title="Preview CTE query results."/>

> 1. Locate the code icon for **Compile File** in between the dbt and the table icons. Clicking it will open a window with the compiled version of the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Locate the code icon for **Compile File** in between the dbt and the table icons. Clicking this icon opens a window with the compiled version of the model.
```

1. Open the **Lineage** tab to visualize the model-level lineage of this model.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-pane.png" width="80%" title="Visualizing model-level lineage."/>
1. Open the **View** menu, click **Command Palette** and enter `dbt: Show Column Lineage` to visualize the column-level lineage in the **Lineage** tab.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/show-cll.png" width="80%" title="Show column-level lineage."/>

#### Use the power of SQL understanding

Code smarter, not harder. The autocomplete and context clues help avoid mistakes and enable you to write fast and accurate SQL. Catch issues before you commit them!

1. To see **Autocomplete** in action, delete `ref('stg_orders')`, and begin typing `ref(stg_` to see the subset of matching model names. Use up and down arrows to select `stg_orders`.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/autocomplete.png" width="80%" title="Autocomplete for a model name."/>
1. Hover over any `*` to see the list of column names and data types being selected.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/hover-star.png" width="80%" title="Hovering over * to see column names and data types."/>

> #### Speeding up common dbt commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Speed up common dbt commands
```
Editing this so it's parallel to its siblings

Testing, testing... is this mic on? It is and it's ready to execute your commands with blazing fast speeds! When you want to test your code against various dbt commands: 

1. The dbt icon in the top right opens a list of extension-specific commands:
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/run-command.png" width="80%" title="Select a command via the dbt icon."/>
1. Opening the **View** menu, clicking the **Command Palette**, and entering `>dbt:` in the command bar shows all the new commands that are available.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-commands-all.png" width="80%" title="dbt commands in the command bar."/>

<ConfettiTrigger>
Try choosing some of them and see what they do 😎

This is just the start. There is so much more available and so much more coming. Be sure to check out our resources for all the information about the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and the dbt VS Code extension!

</ConfettiTrigger>

## Troubleshooting

If you run into any issues, check out the troubleshooting section below.

<Expandable  alt_header="dbt platform configurations">

> 

Author: going to turn this into snippet since it's also used in the_install-dbt-extension snippet

If you're a cloud-based dbt platform user who has the `dbt-cloud:` config in the `dbt_project.yml` file and are also using dbt Mesh, you must have the project ID configured:
    ```yaml
    dbt-cloud:
    project-id: 12345 # Required
    ```
If you don’t configure this correctly, cross-platform references will not resolve properly, and you will encounter errors executing dbt commands.

</Expandable>

<Expandable alt_header="dbt extension not activating">

> If the dbt extension has activated successfully, you will see the dbt Extension label in the status bar at the bottom left of your editor. You can view diagnostic information about the dbt extension by clicking the dbt Extension button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the dbt extension has activated successfully, you will see the **dbt Extension** label in the status bar at the bottom left of your editor. You can view diagnostic information about the dbt extension by clicking the **dbt Extension** button.
```

> If the dbt extension label is not present, then it is likely that the dbt extension was not installed successfully. If this happens, try uninstalling the extension, restarting your editor, and then reinstalling the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the **dbt Extension** label is not present, then it is likely that the dbt extension was not installed successfully. If this happens, try uninstalling the extension, restarting your editor, and then reinstalling the extension.
```

> Note: It is possible to "hide" status bar items in VS Code. Double-check if the dbt Extension status bar label is hidden by right-clicking on the status bar in your editor. If you see dbt Extension in the right-click menu, then the extension has installed successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** It is possible to "hide" status bar items in VS Code. Double-check if the dbt Extension status bar label is hidden by right-clicking on the status bar in your editor. If you see dbt Extension in the right-click menu, then the extension has installed successfully.
```

</Expandable>

<Expandable alt_header="Missing dbt LSP features">

> If you receive a no active LSP for this workspace error message or aren't seeing dbt Language Server (LSP) features in your editor (like autocomplete, go-to-definition, or hover text), start by first following the general troubleshooting steps mentioned earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you receive a `no active LSP for this workspace` error message or aren't seeing dbt Language Server (LSP) features in your editor (like autocomplete, go-to-definition, or hover text), start by first following the general troubleshooting steps mentioned earlier.
```

If you've confirmed the dbt extension is installed correctly but don't see LSP features, try the following:

1. Check extension version — Ensure that you're using the latest available version of the dbt extension by:

>    - Opening the Extensions page in your editor, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Opening the **Extensions** page in your editor, or
```

>    - Going to the Output tab and looking for the version number, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Going to the **Output** tab and looking for the version number, or
```

   - Running `dbtf --version` in the terminal.
2. Reinstall the LSP — If the version is correct, reinstall the LSP:

>    - Open the Command Palette: Command + Shift + P (macOS) or Ctrl + Shift + P (Windows/Linux).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. Open the Command Palette: Command + Shift + P (macOS) or Ctrl + Shift + P (Windows/Linux).
```

>    - Paste `dbt: Reinstall dbt LSP` and enter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Paste `dbt: Reinstall dbt LSP` and enter.
```

The dbt VS Code extension is available in the [Visual Studio extension marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbtLabsInc.dbt). Download it directly from your VS Code editor:

1. Navigate to the **Extensions** tab of VS Code (or Cursor).
2. Search for `dbt` and choose the one from the publisher `dbt Labs Inc`.
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-marketplace.png" width="60%" title="Search for the extension"/>
3. Click **Install**.
4. When the prompt appears, you can register the extension now or skip it (you can register later). You can also check out our [installation instructions](/docs/install-dbt-extension) to come back to it later.
5. Confirm you've installed the extension by looking for the **dbt Extension** label in the status bar. If you see it, the extension was installed successfully!
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-lsp-download.png" width="60%" title="Verify installation in the status bar."/>

## Initialize the Jaffle Shop project
Now let's create your first dbt project powered by <Constant name="fusion" />!

1. Run `dbt init` to set up an example project and configure a database connection profile.

>    - If you *do not* already have a connection profile that you want to use, start with `dbt init` abd use the prompts to configure a profile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If you *do not* have a connection profile that you want to use, start with `dbt init` and use the prompts to configure a profile:
```

    - If you already have a connection profile that you want to use, use the `--skip-profile-setup` flag then edit the generated `dbt_project.yml` to replace `profile: jaffle_shop` with `profile: <YOUR-PROFILE-NAME>`.

>     ```bash

Reviewer: Please indent lines 132-134 so they're under line 130

- Load example data into your warehouse
- Create, build, and test models
- Verify your dbt environment is fully operational

## Explore with the dbt VS Code extension

The dbt VS Code extension compiles and builds your project with the <Constant name="fusion_engine" />, a powerful and blazing fast rebuild of dbt from the ground up. 

Want to see <Constant name="fusion" /> in action? Check out the following video to get a sense of how it works:

<div style={{ position: 'relative', maxWidth: '960px', margin: '2rem auto', overflow: 'hidden', borderRadius: '12px', height: '500px', boxShadow: 'var(--ifm-global-shadow-lw)' }}>
  <iframe
    src="https://app.storylane.io/share/a1rkqx0mbd7a" 
    title="dbt Fusion + VS Code extension walkthrough"
    style={{ position: 'relative', top: '-48px', height: '900px', width: '100%', border: 0, paddingBottom:'calc(42.20% + 25px)',transform: 'scale(1)'}}
    allow="fullscreen; autoplay; encrypted-media"
  />
</div>

Now that your project works, open it in VS Code and see Fusion in action:

1. In VS Code, open the **View** menu and click **Command Palette**. Enter **Workspaces: Add Folder to Workspace**.
2. Select your `jaffle_shop` folder.

> 3. If you skip this step, the [dbt language server](https://docs.getdbt.com/blog/dbt-fusion-engine-components#the-dbt-vs-code-extension-and-language-server) (LSP) will not run. The LSP enables features like autocomplete, hover info, and inline error highlights.

Reviewer: Can we add this instead under Step 2:
```suggestion
        If you don't add the root folder of the dbt project to the workspace, the [dbt language server](https://docs.getdbt.com/blog/dbt-fusion-engine-components#the-dbt-vs-code-extension-and-language-server) (LSP) will not run. The LSP enables features like autocomplete, hover info, and inline error highlights.
```

4. Open a model file to see the definition for the `orders` model. This is the model we'll use in all of the examples below.
    ```bash
        models/marts/orders.sql
    ```
5. Locate **Lineage** and **Query Results** in the lower panel, and the **dbt icon** in the upper right corner next to your editor groups. If you see all of these, the extension is installed correctly and running!
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/extension/extension-running.png" width="80%" title="The VS Code UI with the extension running."/>

Now you're ready to see some of these awesome features in action!

<!--no toc -->

> - [Introduction](#introduction)

Reviewer: Could you clarify why the rest of the quickstart pages were added here? I think it makes sense to keep the previous list here since it introduces the Fusion features

Author: ugh vs code automatially does this! i added teh no toc comment and its suppose to not include this. i'll remove it again
